.\" Copyright (c) 2017 The OpenRC Authors.
.\" See the Authors file at the top-level directory of this distribution and
.\" https://github.com/OpenRC/openrc/blob/master/AUTHORS
.\"
.\" This file is part of OpenRC. It is subject to the license terms in
.\" the LICENSE file found in the top-level directory of this
.\" distribution and at https://github.com/OpenRC/openrc/blob/master/LICENSE
.\" This file may not be copied, modified, propagated, or distributed
.\"    except according to the terms contained in the LICENSE file.
.\"
.Dd May 22, 2017
.Dt openrc-shutdown 8 SMM
.Os OpenRC
.Sh NAME
.Nm openrc-shutdown
.Nd bring the system down
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl d , -no-write
.Op Fl D , -dry-run
.Op Fl H , -halt
.Op Fl k , -kexec
.Op Fl p , -poweroff
.Op Fl R , -reexec
.Op Fl r , -reboot
.Op Fl s , -single
.Op Fl w , -write-only
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is the utility that communicates with
.Xr openrc-init 8
to bring down the system or instruct openrc-init to re-execute itself.
It supports the following options:
.Bl -tag -width "poweroff"
.It Fl d , -no-write
Do not write the wtmp boot record.
.It Fl D , -dry-run
Print the action that would be taken without executing it. This is to
allow testing.
.It Fl H , -halt
Stop all services, kill all remaining processes and halt the system.
.It Fl k , -kexec
Stop all services, kill all processes and boot directly into a new
kernel loaded via
.Xr kexec 8 .
.It Fl p , -poweroff
Stop all services, kill all processes and power off the system.
.It Fl R , -reexec
instruct openrc-init to re-exec itself. This should be used after an
upgrade of OpenRC if you are using openrc-init as your init process.
.It Fl r , -reboot
Stop all services, kill all processes and reboot the system.
.It Fl s , -single
Stop all services, kill all processes and move to single user mode.
.It Fl w , -write-only
Stop all services, kill all processes and move to single user mode.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr openrc-init 8 ,
.Xr kexec 8 ,
.Sh AUTHORS
.An William Hubbs <w.d.hubbs@gmail.com>
