.\" Copyright (c) 2017 The OpenRC Authors.
.\" See the Authors file at the top-level directory of this distribution and
.\" https://github.com/OpenRC/openrc/blob/master/AUTHORS
.\"
.\" This file is part of OpenRC. It is subject to the license terms in
.\" the LICENSE file found in the top-level directory of this
.\" distribution and at https://github.com/OpenRC/openrc/blob/master/LICENSE
.\" This file may not be copied, modified, propagated, or distributed
.\"    except according to the terms contained in the LICENSE file.
.\"
.Dd April 6, 2017
.Dt openrc-init 8 SMM
.Os OpenRC
.Sh NAME
.Nm openrc-init
.Nd the parent of all processes
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is an init process which can be an alternative to sysvinit or any other
init process.
.Pp
To use
.Nm
configure your boot loader to invoke it or symlink it to /sbin/init.
Also, you will need to use
.Xr openrc-shutdown 8 ,
to halt, reboot or poweroff the system.
.Pp
The default runlevel is read from the init command line, the
rc_default_runlevel setting in rc.conf, the kernel command line, or it is
assumed to be "default" if it is not set in any of these places.
.Pp
.Nm
doesn't manage getty's directly, so you will need to manage them another
way. For example, you can use the agetty service script as described in
agetty-guide.md in this distribution.
.Sh BUGS
This was first released as part of OpenRC 0.25.
I do not know of any specific issues. However, since this is the first
release of openrc-init, please test and report any issues you find.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr openrc-shutdown 8 ,
.Sh AUTHORS
.An William Hubbs <w.d.hubbs@gmail.com>
