.\" Copyright (c) 2007-2015 The OpenRC Authors.
.\" See the Authors file at the top-level directory of this distribution and
.\" https://github.com/OpenRC/openrc/blob/master/AUTHORS
.\"
.\" This file is part of OpenRC. It is subject to the license terms in
.\" the LICENSE file found in the top-level directory of this
.\" distribution and at https://github.com/OpenRC/openrc/blob/master/LICENSE
.\" This file may not be copied, modified, propagated, or distributed
.\"    except according to the terms contained in the LICENSE file.
.\"
.Dd May 1, 2009
.Dt RC-SERVICE 8 SMM
.Os OpenRC
.Sh NAME
.Nm rc-service
.Nd locate and run an OpenRC service with the given arguments
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl c , -ifcrashed
.Ar service cmd
.Op Ar ...
.Nm
.Op Fl i , -ifexists
.Ar service cmd
.Op Ar ...
.Nm
.Op Fl I , -ifinactive
.Ar service cmd
.Op Ar ...
.Nm
.Op Fl N , -ifnotstarted
.Ar service cmd
.Op Ar ...
.Nm
.Fl e , -exists
.Ar service
.Nm
.Fl l , -list
.Nm
.Fl r , -resolve
.Ar service
.Sh DESCRIPTION
Service scripts could be in different places on different systems.
.Nm
locates the specified service and runs it with the given arguments.
If
.Fl i , -ifexists
is given then
.Nm
returns 0 even if the service does not exist.
If
.Fl I , -ifinactive
or
.Fl N , -ifnotstarted
is given then
.Nm
returns 0 if the service exists but is in the wrong state.
.Pp
If given the
.Fl l , -list
argument then
.Nm
will list all available services.
.Pp
.Fl e , -exists
return 0 if it can find
.Ar service ,
otherwise -1.
.Fl r , -resolve
does the same and also prints the full path of the service to stdout.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr openrc 8 ,
.Xr stdout 3
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Roy Marples <roy@marples.name>
