README.md, before:

# systemd - System and Service Manager

[![Build Status](https://semaphoreci.com/api/v1/projects/28a5a3ca-3c56-4078-8b5e-7ed6ef912e14/443470/shields_badge.svg)](https://semaphoreci.com/systemd/systemd)<br/>
[![Coverity Scan Status](https://scan.coverity.com/projects/350/badge.svg)](https://scan.coverity.com/projects/350)

## Details

General information about systemd can be found in the [systemd Wiki](http://www.freedesktop.org/wiki/Software/systemd).

Information about build requirements are provided in the [README file](../master/README).

Consult our [NEWS file](../master/NEWS) for information about what's new in the most recent systemd versions.

Please see our [Contribution Guidelines](../master/.github/CONTRIBUTING.md) for more information about filing GitHub Issues and posting GitHub Pull Requests.

When preparing patches for systemd, please follow our [Coding Style Guidelines](../master/CODING_STYLE).

If you are looking for support, please contact our [mailing list](http://lists.freedesktop.org/mailman/listinfo/systemd-devel) or join our [IRC channel](irc://irc.freenode.org/%23systemd).

Commit message:

documentation: add a short document describing how to test your systemd build tree

README.md, after:

# systemd - System and Service Manager

[![Build Status](https://semaphoreci.com/api/v1/projects/28a5a3ca-3c56-4078-8b5e-7ed6ef912e14/443470/shields_badge.svg)](https://semaphoreci.com/systemd/systemd)<br/>
[![Coverity Scan Status](https://scan.coverity.com/projects/350/badge.svg)](https://scan.coverity.com/projects/350)

## Details

General information about systemd can be found in the [systemd Wiki](http://www.freedesktop.org/wiki/Software/systemd).

Information about build requirements are provided in the [README file](../master/README).

Consult our [NEWS file](../master/NEWS) for information about what's new in the most recent systemd versions.

Please see the [HACKING file](../master/HACKING) for information how to hack on systemd and test your modifications.

Please see our [Contribution Guidelines](../master/.github/CONTRIBUTING.md) for more information about filing GitHub Issues and posting GitHub Pull Requests.

When preparing patches for systemd, please follow our [Coding Style Guidelines](../master/CODING_STYLE).

If you are looking for support, please contact our [mailing list](http://lists.freedesktop.org/mailman/listinfo/systemd-devel) or join our [IRC channel](irc://irc.freenode.org/%23systemd).
